COMP 15 Proj 1: The Biologist's Grep
Sejal Dua (sdua01)
31/October/2018

Description: 

Our task for this project was to help a hypothetical Tufts
biology lab with DNA sequencing. A DNA sequence consists of long chains made
up of 4 different nitogenous bases: Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, and Thymine
(A, C, G, T). Some sub-tasks we executed to best help the biology lab included
checking if a sequence in the file is one they have seen before or something
new. Furthermore, we also looked for partial matches of sequences. To give
something of value to the biology lab, our mission was to create a program
that can process a series of requests from an input file. The three requests
the program had to be able to process were insert, query, and remove.

Program Purpose:

The purpose of this project was to use the knowledge we previously applied in
HW4 to work with tries, which involve slightly more complex operations than
binary search trees because they do not have the invariant of being able
to compare node data via inequalities. We were just introduced to all types
of trees in lecture, but working with letters (hence, strings and characters)
is relatively new territory. The big picture goal of Project 1 was to improve
our level of comfort with trees and test our ability to make design decisions
while being cognizant of space and time efficiently.

Acknowledgements: 

>>> The TAs in Halligan (specifically, KEVIN, Saad, Clara)
>>> Lecture Slides
>>> stack overflow for teaching me how to use tuples (did not go thru with it)
>>> James
>>> Ryan
>>> Jake


Files:

- main.cpp: driver file. Opens an ifstream object and ofstream object
to parse requests from the user. The three requests are 'i', 'q', or 'r',
which respectively execute insert, query, and remove functions and then
deposit the output into an output object to be diffed.
- Trie.h/.cpp: Implementation and interface of the 
Trie class. Contains a constructor, a destructor, a print all sequences
function, the major 3 requests (insert, remove, and query), of course, a
contains function (for the easy/normal cases), and some functions that 
induce/ enter recursive calls. In addition, there are many private member 
functions that help implement the class as efficiently and seemlessly as 
ossible. All internal processing is private to the class, so what the 
computer is executing is not relevant for the user's purposes. 
- README: this
- Makefile: specifies dependencies, sets the name of the executable to be
SeqMatch and includes things like clean, provide, and valgrind, which are 
extremely useful.


Compile/Run:

* Compile by typing "make"
* Run by typing "./SeqMatch"
* OR link commands by typing "make && ./SeqMatch"!
* Check for leaks by typing "valgrind ./SeqMatch"


Outline of Data Structures/Algorithms:

For a while I tried to implement my trie in some funky ways. However, this
proved to be fruitless for me and then I started running out of time. I
implemented my data structure in the most simplistic way I could think of,
but still there are some complexities. For example, I made my code more
algorithmic and elegant as opposed to storing data or letters, in this case,
for each DNA base. This came with some advantages and disadvantages. I also
elected to organize my pointers into an array of pointers, which was also
for iterative purposes.
Advantages:
- I was able to use for loops for most functions
- I kept my function lengths shorter
- I took up less space, technically
Disadvantages:
- I had to make a static string variable called BASES which holds "ACTG?*"
so that I could index into it and know which next I wanted to get when working
with a TrieNode
- I had to use top-down recursion, which made my brain's runtime slower

Tries were perfect for this project because their big 0 is either the
height of the trie or the length of the word you are working with. They
do not take very long to execute a query because everything is recursive
so there is no need to search through every single letter in the trie. We
just care about generation-by-generation recursive traversals, which is
great news for us!
As far as space complexity, they could be a bit more efficient (especially
when you consider what happens when you insert something like "TCG?A??A?"), 
but here, each individual letter in the DNA sequence was relevant to us and 
important for functional use.

I would have liked to venture into the territory of compressing tries, but
(1) the question marks made the trie largely dispersed / wide, so there was
little need to compress anything and (2) I did not get around to it due to
all the time I spent changing my implementation method. 

Explanation of how I handled insert, remove, and query requests:
INSERT: 
Base case: the sequence is fully processed and we are at the end of the word
we are trying to insert.
Recursively traverse down thru current TrieNodes, inserting new ones as needed.
REMOVE:
Base case: return false if we have "bottom'd out" so that we can then start
recursing back up through the nodes in the trie
Recursively traverse through the sequence we are trying to delete.
Once we have arrived, flip the bool end of sequence marker to false so that
even if we cannot safely delete the node, at least the node is lazily deleted.
Then if we are at a leaf node and the node is not the root, actually remove it.
QUERY:
Base BASE case: The exact query sequence exists (letter-for-letter) --> 
return it back out and report 100% accuracy
If we do not have the ideal base case situation above, enter the recursive
helper function, which does not have a base case.
Algorithm is completely divided into two separate recursive functions
- get longest prefix (? characters are handled here)
- get shortest suffix (* characters are handled here)
Concatenate prefix and suffix and return that as the closest match


Testing:

[Process of Testing]
- Unit testing: I made a Test.cpp right when I started this homework assignment
and instantiated some arbitrary trie. I modified the values
in the binary search tree and inserted them with a for (str : seqs[]) loop. 
Then, I called each function directly after writing it to see if my code was
working properly. I knew that debugging was going to be a pain for this 
assignment because there are so many functions and there's such a high 
likelihood of forgetting to reassign a parent pointer or something. The unit 
testing that I did on each function certainly helped, but that was just one 
aspect of the testing I did. Most of the errors I faced had to do with the way
my functions interacted with each other.
- Compare testing: I tried all the given example cases in the spec to make
sure I was getting the expected results.
- Imaginitive testing: I thought of tricky edge cases and drew them out
to compare my output with what I would expect to be the best returned
string (according to my understanding of the task).
- Execution example 1
- Execution example 2

[Bugs]
Some bugs I spent a lot of time and energy troubleshooting included:
1. SEG FAULTS
2. linker command error
3. Abort() ......
4. suffix was not being reset when we tried traversing down a different path
(cout-ed "CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC...")
5. for a while, I was trying to implement ArrayList.cpp and my understanding
of pointers and how to call functions on objects that I was referencing
via pointers is shaky


[Testing on inputs of different sizes]
- Note: did not need to consider insert, query, or remove on an empty string
- I inserted a sequence of just one letter and removed it
- I made a really big Trie and inserted and removed everything
- Did not get to much query testing because I went back and forth on how to 
execute this task (I was using tuples for a while, but then I even toyed with 
creating an ArrayList.cpp/.h for a while – I was very indecisive)

Observations:
> Both handled the functions I tested without error or unexpected results
> My inspect_root and inspect_node debugging functions really helped me
visualize what node has which pointers

[Base Cases and Edge Cases]
--- insert ---
* word we wish to insert is already contained in trie
* word we wish to insert is a subsequence of word already contained in trie
* subsequence of word we wish to insert is already contained in trie
--- remove ---
* word we wish to remove is contained in trie
* word we wish to remove is a subsequence of word already contained in trie
* subsequence of word we wish to remove is already contained in trie
--- query ---
* word we are querying is identical to a sequence in the trie
* word we are querying is a perfect match and more
* the word with a higher percentage isn't necessarily the right one
* the word with the highest percentage match is the right one
* tiebreaker: need to return the word that is shortest
* tiebreaker: need to return the word that comes alphabetically first
* special characters: ? (singular)
* special characters: ? (at end)
* special characters: multiple ?s
* special characters: * (always at end)

[Logistics of Testing]
I used the following commands to compile and run my test:
* clang++ -Wall -Wextra -std=c++11 Trie.cpp Test.cpp -o test
* ./test
* valgrind ./test


What I learned from this project
- When the complexity of implementation starts to get more difficult, being 
able to debug my own code will be critical in order to successfully
complete tasks. When I would go to office hours to try and figure out
why I was seg-faulting or getting some nonsensical result, I would have to
spend so much more just getting them caught up to speed on the quirks of
my implementation. In the future, I want to be confident enough in my skills
to insert cerr statements on my own and track down the problem.
- While it is good to have faith in ideas for implementation, I need to learn
not to pursue the less ideal idea for too long. I caught myself doing that
twice for this project, and that caught me. I was too indecisive and cared
too much about the "ideal solution." The truth is any implementation is good
as long as it works.
- My organization and value for elegant, concise solutions is going to be
an asset to me. So many people I talked to "duct tape'd" their code to get
it to work. The one thing this means for me is that I have to start projects
much, much earlier.
- How ASCII characters work
- Sometimes being in Haligan isn't going to fix my problems. I need to know
how to make the best use of my time.
